.TH emerge "1" "May 2001" "portage 1.5" 
.SH NAME
ebuild \- manual page for the emerge program, the main new and enhanced interface to the Portage system. 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B emerge
[\fIoptions\fR] \fIfile\fR ...
.TP
.B emerge
[\fIoptions\fR] system
.SH DESCRIPTION
The emrge programe is the new main user interface to the portage system. It will
replace the \fIebuild\fR in most areas. It can be used to build install packages
from source or to install or build binary packages. Please take a look at the
ebuild (1) manual also.
.PP
.SH OPTIONS 
\fIfile\fR
.TP
This must be a valid ebuild script or a vaild tbz2 package. For further information read ebuild(5).
.TP
\fBsystem\fR
.TP
If system is used emerge will install all packages listed in /etc/make.profile/packages and also packages that are required from those.
.TP
\fB--pretend\fR 
Only shows a list of packages emerge whould install. emerge does not install the
packages.
.TP
\fB--autoclean\fR
Clean the build dir after merging the package.
.TP
\fB--usepkg\fR
emerge will install binary packages if avaliable. Otherwise it will build
from source. All binaries must be in the \fIPKGDIR\fR (default /usr/portage/packages/All)
.TP
\fB--buildpkg\fR
emerge will build a binary package for each package it builds and merges.
The package will be created in the \fIPKGDIR\fR/[category] subdir and
hardlinked to \fIPKGDIR\fR/All.
.TP
.SH AUTHOR
Achim Gottinger <achim@gentoo.org>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
ebuild(1) ebuild(5) make.defaults(5) make.conf(5)
.TP
The helper apps in \fI/usr/lib/portage/bin\fR.
.SH FILES
\fB/etc/make.conf\fR 
Contains variables for the build-process and 
overwrites those in make.defaults
.TP
\fB/etc/make.profile/make.defaults\fR
Contains the profile dependend variables for the build-process,
you should edit \fI/etc/make.conf\fR instead.
.TP
\fB/etc/make.profile/virtuals\fR 
Contains a list of packages used to resolve virtual dependencies
.TP
\fB/etc/make.profile/package\fR
Contains a list of packages used for the base system
.TP
\fB/etc/make.globals\fR 
Contains the default variables for the build-process, 
you should edit \fI/etc/make.conf\fR instead.
.TP
