.TH make.defaults "5" "January 2001" "portage 1.4-r4" 
.SH NAME
ebuild \- manual page for make.defaults
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B make.defaults
.SH DESCRIPTION
This File contains various variables that are used by the \fIebuild\fR
script
.PP
.SH VARIABLES
\fBROOT\fR = \fI[path]\fR
This is the default installation target for ebuild.
.TP
\fBMAINTAINER\fR = \fI[yes|no]\fR
If you have and developer cvs access at cvs.gentoo.org
and \fIMAINTAINER\fR is set to \fI"yes"\fR, the md5 checksum files
for the sources get automatically added to the cvs-tree.
.TP
\fBPROXY HTTP_PROXY FTP_PROXY\fR = \fI[host:port]\fR
These vars are used if the sources must be downloaded from the
internet by \fIwget(1)\fR. They are only required if you use a proxy server
for internet access. Eighter define \fIPROXY\fR or
\fIPROXY_FTP\fR and \fIPROXY_HTTP\fR
.TP
\fBGENTOO_MIRRORS\fR = \fI[url]\fR
Insert your nearest \fIIBIBLIO\fR mirror here. This location is tried for
source download before the ones listed in the \fIebuild scripts\fR.
.TP
\fBCHOST\fR
This variable gets passed by the \fIebuild scripts\fR to the \fIconfigure\fR
step as \fI--host=${CHOST}\fR. So you can force the build-host with that.
.TP
\fBMAKEOPTS\fR
Use this variable if you want to use parallel make.
.TP
\fBCFLAGS CXXFLAGS\fR 
Use them to controll the optimisation flags of your builds.
.TP
\fBDEBUG\fR
If defined binaries and librarys don't get stripped before \fImerge\fR
.TP
\fBPACKAGE\fR = \fI[tbz2|tgz]\fR
You can define if you want to use gzip(1) or bzip2(1) for package
compression.
.TP
\fBUSE\fR
This variable contains options that controll the build-behaviour of
several packages. More information in ebuild(5).
\fBFETCHCOMMAND\fR
This variable contains the command used for fetching package-sources from
the internet. 
.TP
\fBPORTAGE_TMPDIR\fR = \fI[path]\fR
Defines the location of the temporary build directories. 
.TP
\fBBUILD_PREFIX\fR = \fI[path]\fR
Defines the location of the package working directory. 
.TP
\fBPKG_TMPDIR\fR = \fI[path]\fR
\fIpkgmerge(1)\fR uses this dir to extract the package before the
files get merged to the live filesystem.
.TP
\fBPORTDIR\fR = \fI[path]\fR
Defines the location of all portage dependend subdirs.
.TP
\fBDISTDIR\fR = \fI[path]\fR
Defines the location of the source-files.
.TP
\fBPKGDIR\fR = \fI[path]\fR
Defines the location of the packages.
.TP
\fBRPMDIR\fR = \fI[path]\fR
Defines the location of the RPM packages
.TP
\fBCURRENTILE\fR = \fI[path to file]\fR
Defines the file wich hold a list of all 
actuall packages.
.TP
.SH AUTHOR
Achim Gottinger <achim@gentoo.org>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
ebuild(1) ebuild(5) make.conf(5)
.TP
The \fI/usr/bin/ebuild\fR script. 
The helper apps in \fI/usr/lib/portage/bin\fR.
.SH FILES
\fB/etc/make.conf\fR 
Contains variables for the build-process and 
overwrites those in make.defaults
.TP
\fB/etc/make.defaults\fR 
Contains the default variables for the build-process, 
you should edit \fI/etc/make.conf\fR instead.
.TP
