.TH ebuild "1" "January 2001" "portage 1.4-r4" 
.SH NAME
ebuild \- manual page for ebuild 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ebuild
[\fIFILE\fR] [\fIOPTION\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Todo
.PP
.SH OPTIONS 
\fBFILE:\fR
.TP
This must be a valid ebuild script. For further information read ebuild(5).
.TP
\fBOPTIONS:\fR
.TP
\fBcheck\fR 
Checks if all build-dependecies get resolved
.TP
\fBclean\fR
Cleans the build directory
.TP
\fBfetch\fR
Checks if the all sources are available and have a valid
md5 checksum. Downloads sources from the internet if not
localy available. Exits with a waring if md5-checksums 
differ.
.TP
\fBunpack\fR
Extracts the sources to the \fIbuild directory\fR 
by running the \fIsrc_unpack\fR
function
.TP
\fBcompile\fR
Compiles the sources in the \fIbuild directory\fR 
by running the \fIsrc_compile\fR
function
.TP
\fBinstall\fR
Installs the package to the temporary \fIinstall directory\fR 
by running the \fIsrc_install\fR function
.TP
\fBqmerge\fR
This function installs the package from the \fIinstall directory\fR
to the live filesystem. By running \fIpkg_preinst\fR function first.
Then the files get copied from \fIinstall directory\fR to the live
filesystem and a list of installed files with md5 checksums gets
build in \fI/var/db/pkg/[category]/[package]/CONTENTS\fR. After
that the functions \fIpkg_postinst\fR gets executed.
.TP
\fBmerge\fR
This function first checks if the package is installed. If not it executes
the \fIinstall\fR and \fIqmerge\fR functions.
.TP
\fBremerge\fR
Does the same as \fImerge\fR without checking if the package is installed.
.TP
\fBunmerge\fR
This function first executes the \fIpkg_prerm\fR function. Then it 
removes all files from the live filesystem that have a valid
md5 checksum and mtime in the package contents file.
Finaly it runs \fIpkg_postrm\fR. It is save to merge
a new version of a package first and then unmerge th old one.
.TP
\fBpackage\fR
Builds a package from the files in the temporary \fIinstall directory\fR
.TP
\fBrpm\fR
Builds a redhat package from the files in the temporary \fIinstall
directory\fR. Ebuild's dependencies methods are not integrated in rpm
package management at the moment.
.TP
.SH AUTHOR
Achim Gottinger <achim@gentoo.org>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
ebuild(5) make.defaults(5) make.conf(5)
.TP
The \fI/usr/bin/ebuild\fR script. 
The helper apps in \fI/usr/lib/portage/bin\fR.
.SH FILES
\fB/etc/make.conf\fR 
Contains variables for the build-process and 
overwrites those in make.defaults
.TP
\fB/etc/make.defaults\fR 
Contains the default variables for the build-process, 
you should edit \fI/etc/make.conf\fR instead.
.TP
